# TOWER CONTROLLER (STUDENT 2)

## Position Overview

Tower is responsible for all take-offs and landings and gives
instructions to effect proper sequencing and separation of aircraft for
departure. Tower decides which runways are being used for take-offs and
landings depending on wind direction etc. You are also responsible for
aircraft on the ground when they are on the runway or are about to cross
a runway. Landing aircraft are handed over to Ground as soon as they
leave the runway (or sooner at tower’s discretion) Departing aircraft
are handed over to the next controller when they leave your airspace.

Otopeni Tower is responsible for all aircraft and ground vehicles
movements on the runways. The main objective of a Tower controller is to
ensure a safe departure and arrival for aircraft and also to get
aircraft on time and to make sure he helps at economy of the airlines.

Local authority has allocated two frequencies for Otopeni Tower. The
main one is using the callsign LROP\_S\_TWR and transmitting on the
frequency 120.900, and the second one is using the callsign LROP\_N\_TWR
and transmitting on the frequency 121.850. For both positions the radio
callsign is the same: “Otopeni Tower”. The majority of the time only the
main frequency is opened (LROP\_S\_TWR) which control both runways on
Otopeni airport. If LROP\_N\_TWR is online, it controls the north runway
(08L/26R) and LROP\_S\_TWR will maintain control of the south runway
(08R/26L). It is easy to remember the ownership of the positions because
of callsign designators which are “S” from south and “N” from north.

When you come online as Tower on VATSIM you have to select the active
runways from the “Active airport/runway selector dialog” in Euroscope.
The selection of active runways is depending by wind conditions
(aircraft should always arrive and depart with a headwind), by NOTAM and
also by the expecting traffic. The preferred runways at LROP are 08L and
08R which are both equipped with CAT III ILS approach in case of LVP and
also ensure a short taxi route for departing aircraft, and a short
approach for aircraft which comes from west (the majority of them). So
when the wind is calm and also even if there is a light wind favorable
for runway 26L/R (till 6-7kt) it is preferred to use runways 08L/R as
active. Regarding Euroscope’s tools you only have to select “DEPART”
status in departure list just after you give takeoff clearance to an
aircraft. Also, as tower, you have to connect the Euroscope ATIS.

You should not forget about coordination with Approach before takeoff.
If the aircraft has already contacted you and you haven't coordinated
with the approach controller you must ask the aircraft to hold short of
the runway until this coordination has been completed. You cannot line
up aircraft without coordination because it is possible to receive an
instruction from approach which the aircraft is not able to comply with,
this will cause the runway to be blocked. The holding point is the line
before entry the runway which ensure the safety distance between
aircraft. You can also say hold short for an aircraft which will mean
that the aircraft will be stopped with the nose perpendicular to the
runway. Hold short is used only when you have to wait for other aircraft
to vacate the runway or only when an aircraft with a small wingspan is
on final. Also, you will receive coordination reports from the Approach
controller where you receive the arrival runway for each aircraft and
the estimate time that it is from final, this helps you and the Ground
controller to manage the departing traffic efficiently.

Priority is different from that of a ground controller. As tower,
priority is given based on the aircraft's economy. The arrival aircraft
which is on final have priority towards the departing aircraft which is
waiting at holding point. You have to be very convinced when you give a
take-off clearence when an aircraft is on final, because you can’t risk
a go-around for arriving aircraft. How i say before, economy of the
airlines is the priority and an aircraft which is waiting at holding
point for few minutes will not use more fuel than an aircraft which is
going-around and flying pattern to coming again on approach.

Beside of runways you also have under control the CTR Otopeni which is
an airspace with a semicircular shape centered on the airport, with
semicircular shape north of the airport because on south is bordering
with CTR Baneasa. CTR Otopeni covers ground to 2000ft. As tower, you
have to control all VFR flights which are flying in within the Otopeni
CTR, even if they are not departing or arriving at LROP or at any other
airfields within the CTR, flying a traffic pattern or just simply
crossing the Otopeni CTR. Control of aircraft within the CTR is
procedural (in real life radar is used only for orientation) and you
have to request and provide further information to the aircraft. You
have to request the current squawk code of the aircraft if they are
departing from an airfield other than LROP that are within the CTR (also
for Otopeni departures if is unknown) or are just entry in CTR from the
outside. In normal conditions the pilot should give you his squawk code
on initial contact. For an aircraft flying traffic patterns you can
request that they report the leg of the pattern and also any position
report (buildings, waypoints, distance from VORs, etc). For aircraft
which are not flying in the pattern you can request at any time entry
and exit points, followed route within CTR, estimate times for entry or
leaving the airspace, altitude, direction of leaving the CTR, speed and
other information which help you to separate the aircraft. You have to
inform VFR aircraft about the local QNH and weather/runway conditions.
You also have to inform IFR traffic and also VFR traffic about any
aircraft from vicinity mentioning the approximate distance in miles and
clock direction toward other aircraft. Because the top limit of CTR is
2000ft and the upper airspace is TMA Bucuresti which is a class A
airspace where VFR flights are not allowed you have to be sure that VFR
aircraft are not flying above 2000ft until the exit below of TMA
Bucuresti or when they are flying in north of TMA where the bottom limit
of TMA is 4500ft. When an aircraft leave the CTR Otopeni on south you
have to transfer him to Baneasa Tower on 120.800 and if the aircraft
leave the CTR through a other direction you have to transfer them to
Bucharest FIC (Flight Information Center) because they entry in a class
G uncontrolled airspace. In normal conditions, the pilot should report
when he exits your airspace.

![image](/images/CTR_Otopeni.png)

## Duties

We take a flight from approaching the holding point to handoff to
Approach and backward.

We supose **DLH1CF** is flying from Bucharest Henri Coanda to Munich:

> **Pilot**: Otopeni Tower, good evening,DLH1CF approaching holding
> runway 08R.
> 
> **ATC**: DLH1CF, good day, Otopeni Tower, hold short runway 08R,
> report ready for departure.
> 
> **Pilot**: Hold short 08R, will report ready for departure, DLH1CF.
> 
> **Pilot**: DLH1CF is ready for departure.
> 
> **ATC**: DLH1CF, line-up and wait runway 08R.
> 
> **Pilot**: Line-up 08R, DLH1CF.
> 
> **ATC**: DLH1CF, wind is 060 degress with 5 knots, you are cleared for
> take-off runway 08R, after departure contact Bucharest Approach on
> freqfency 118.250, good bye.
> 
> **Pilot**: Copied wind conditions, clear for takeoff runway 08R, after
> departure contact Bucharest Approach 118.250, good bye.

*Note: You can jump straight to takeoff clearance should traffic permit
this, and if coordination with approach is complete. The coordination
with Approach is mandatory, as if the Approach gives you any instruction
for aircraft after departure you have to tell them before aircraft entry
on the runway (heading, initial climb, etc). After takeoff instruction
you can tell to the aircraft to report airborne and after his report to
handoff him to Approach. If you don’t tell to aircraft to report
airborne you can handoff him to Approach like in example listed above,
or after you are sure if he is airborne. When you hold an aircraft at
holding point because other is on short final you have to tell to the
holding aircraft the reason for hold and information about the landing
traffic like distance for example (Example:”Hold position 08R, traffic
short final 08R, 3 miles”). If is an aircraft departing and other
aircraft approaching holding point you can tell to the second aircraft
to “hold short runway 08R, (departing traffic)”. If the ahead aircraft
is rolling you can tell to second aircraft "behind departing traffic,
line up and wait runway 08R". When first aircraft is airborne to give
the takeoff clearance to the second aircraft you have to wait for the
separation. The minimum separation time is 2 minutes between a LIGHT or
MEDIUM aircraft taking off behind a HEAVY aircraft and a LIGHT aircraft
taking off behind a MEDIUM aircraft to avoid wake turbulence. You can
read more about wake turbulence separation here. Also, you have to
ensure 4 miles interval between aircraft with the same category, 5 miles
interval between aircraft with 1 category difference (MEDIUM before
LIGHT or HEAVY before MEDIUM) and 6 miles interval between aircraft with
2 category difference (HEAVY before LIGHT). The moment when you have to
coordinate with approach position is when an aircraft is approaching
holding point. You have to tell to approach the callsign of aircraft and
departure runway and procedure (SID name or radar vectors).*

Example:

> "DLH1CF is ready for departure runway 08R, SOKRU1K departure."
> 
> "DLH1CF is ready for departure runway 08R, vectors."

We supose **ROT3VR** is flying from Barcelona to Bucharest Henri Coanda:

> **Pilot**: Otopeni Tower, good evening, ROT3VR on ILS approach runway
> 08R.
> 
> **ATC**: ROT3VR, good evening, Otopeni Tower, wind is 050 with 4
> knots, runway 08R clear to land.
> 
> **Pilot**: Clear to land runway 08R, ROT3VR.

*Note: The extract above is the ideal one. When an aircraft is on
approach his landing clearance is influenced by traffic and weather or
runway condition. So if the runway is busy for the moment you have to
tell to aircraft to continue approach "ROT3VR, continue approach runway
08R". You can also tell him the traffic situation: "You are number
two/three for landing" / "Traffic departing". When runway is clear for
him you can clear him to land using the phraseology from above. Also you
can give speed restriction to aircraft on approach to ensure time for
landing clearance: "maintain minimum approach speed" / "maintain speed
140 (or less)". If the aircraft reach 4 miles from the runway and
landing clearance is not possible you have to give a go around to the
aircraft. When an aircraft is go around you have to give him "maintain
runway heading and climb to 4000ft" then to coordinate with approach to
see if he has any initial instruction for him and after that handoff the
aircraft to Approach. If you say to an aircraft "expect late landing
clearance" and the wind condition, in case of impossibility of landing
clearance, go around can be given until 2 miles from runway. When you
give landing clearance you can tell the aircraft which taxiway to vacate
on ("Vacate on D") and also you can tell him to report when runway is
vacated.*

> **ATC**: ROT3VR, contact Otopeni Ground Control on 121.700, good bye\!
> 
> **Pilot**: Contact Otopeni Ground on 121.700, ROT3VR, good bye\!

*Note: The moment of handoff to ground should be when you see visual the
aircraft which vacate the runway or when pilot announces runway vacated.
If you have an aircraft on final waiting for his landing clearance and
an aircraft report runway vacated, you should give landing clearance
first and then handoff the landed aircraft to the ground controller.*

| Date       | Changes         |
| ---------- | --------------- |
| 13.03.2016 | Initial release |

